.\" man page for the dotfiles CLI. View with: man dotfiles
.\" (MANPATH is extended by home/zsh/path.zsh) or: man ./man/man1/dotfiles.1
.TH DOTFILES 1 "2026-06-20" "dotfiles" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
dotfiles \- unified entry point for common dotfiles operations
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dotfiles
.I command
.RI [ arguments ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dotfiles
is a thin wrapper around the scripts in the dotfiles repository. Most
subcommands delegate to an existing script, forwarding all arguments and the
exit code; the
.B doctor
subcommand runs a read\-only aggregate health check.
.PP
The command is available on
.B PATH
through the
.I bin/dotfiles
shim, which is added to
.B PATH
by
.IR home/zsh/path.zsh .
It can also be run directly as
.IR "bash ~/dotfiles/scripts/dotfiles.sh <command>" .
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B help
Show the usage message. This is also the default when no command is given, and
is equivalent to
.B \-h
and
.BR \-\-help .
.TP
.B status
Print a read\-only snapshot of dotfiles health: the repository git state and the
result of the last
.I update.sh
run. Delegates to
.IR scripts/status.sh .
.TP
.B verify
Run the full environment health check (symlinks, required tools, runtimes, git
health, Brewfile drift, and more). Delegates to
.IR verify.sh .
Exits non\-zero when there are errors such as broken symlinks.
.TP
.B doctor
Read\-only aggregate health check. Runs
.B status
.RB ( \-\-exit\-code ),
then
.BR verify ,
then a
.B zsh \-n
syntax check of
.I home/zshrc
and the
.I home/zsh/*.zsh
modules, and finally a Ghostty configuration check. It makes no changes and
exits non\-zero if any check fails.
.TP
.B update
Pull the latest dotfiles, re\-symlink, upgrade packages and runtimes, then run
the health check. Delegates to
.IR update.sh .
.TP
.B profile
Show or set this machine's profile
.RB ( personal ,
.BR work ,
.BR minimal ,
or
.BR server ).
Delegates to
.IR scripts/profile.sh .
.TP
.B cleanup
Remove common dotfile cruft (backups, cache, legacy configs). Delegates to
.IR scripts/cleanup.sh .
.SH OPTIONS
Options are command\-specific and forwarded to the underlying script. Run
.B dotfiles
.I command
.B \-\-help
to see the options a given command accepts. For example:
.PP
.RS
.nf
dotfiles status \-\-verify
dotfiles update \-\-dry\-run
dotfiles cleanup \-\-dry\-run
.fi
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B dotfiles doctor
Run the full read\-only health check.
.TP
.B dotfiles update \-\-dry\-run
Preview an update without changing anything.
.TP
.B dotfiles profile set work
Switch this machine to the
.I work
profile.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The command succeeded.
.TP
.B non\-zero
A command failed, one of
.BR doctor 's
checks failed, or an unknown command was given.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/dotfiles/scripts/dotfiles.sh
The CLI implementation.
.TP
.I ~/dotfiles/bin/dotfiles
PATH shim that delegates to the CLI.
.TP
.I ~/dotfiles/home/zsh/path.zsh
Adds the repository
.I bin
directory to
.B PATH
and the
.I man
directory to
.BR MANPATH .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1),
.BR zsh (1).
Project documentation lives in
.I ~/dotfiles/docs/cli.md
and on the documentation site.
.SH AUTHOR
Brad Bergeron.
